Add Resource Manager docs page (#826)
okteto/docs: src/content/admin/resource-manager.mdx

---
title: Resource Manager
description: Automated resource management that adapts to changes in real utilization over time
sidebar_label: Resource Manager
id: resource-manager
---

import Image from "@theme/Image";

> Okteto's Resource Manager is an automated tool designed to optimize CPU and memory resource allocation for your Kubernetes workloads on Okteto.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Okteto's Resource Manager is an automated tool designed to optimize CPU and memory resource requests for your Kubernetes workloads on Okteto.
```
I think it's important to use the same terms as Kubernetes

By analyzing the actual utilization of resources, the Resource Manager adjusts the resource requests for your pods, ensuring they are appropriately configured without the need for manual intervention.

## Why Use the Resource Manager?
Manually configuring CPU and memory requests in Kubernetes can be tedious and error-prone.
Incorrect configurations can lead to poor performance, overloaded nodes, and a slow developer experience on Okteto.
The Resource Manager automates this process, dynamically adjusting resource requests based on real-time usage data of the Okteto Cluster.
This ensures your pods are running efficiently and your nodes are balanced well, improving overall performance and developer experience.

### Key Benefits
- **Improved Workflow Productivity**: Automates resource configuration, allowing developers to focus on coding rather than managing Kubernetes settings

> - **Optimized Resource Usage**: Ensures resources are neither underutilized nor over-utilized, leading to cost savings

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Optimized Resource Usage**: Ensures resources are neither underutilized nor over-utilized, leading to cost savings and better performance
```

- **Enhanced Developer Adoption**: Improves the performance of development environments, leading to higher satisfaction and adoption rates amongst developers
- **Cost Efficiency**: Reduces the overhead associated with manually configuring resources, lowering operational costs

## How it Works

The Resource Manager monitors the actual CPU and memory usage of your pods over time.
It calculates the average usage and automatically adjusts the resource requests for new pods based on these averages. The system uses the following process:

1. Data Collection: The Resource Manager queries the Kubernetes Metric Server to collect CPU and memory usage data for all pods managed by Okteto. The Kubernetes Metric Server is required for using Resource Manager

> 1. Average Calculation: It calculates the average CPU and memory usage for each container family (grouped by development environment, component, and container name)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Average Calculation: It calculates the average CPU and memory usage for each container family (grouped by development environment, controller name, and container name)
```

1. Recommendation Generation: The Resource Manager generates new resource requests based on the average usage, applying a correction factor to ensure efficiency
1. Automatic Application: When a new pod is created, the recommended resource requests are automatically applied unless overridden by specific annotations

## Enabling and Configuring the Resource Manager
### Enabling the Resource Manager

> The Resource Manager is controlled through the Helm chart configuration. By default, it is enabled with the following settings:

Reviewer: Let's skip this part for now

Author: including the yaml?

``` yaml
resourceManager:
  enabled: true
  schedule: 300
  deletePeriod: 15
  priorityClassName:
    labels:
	annotations:
	resources:
	recommendations:
		weight:
		correction:
		min:
			cpu:
			memory:
```
#### To enable the Resource Manager:

1. Deploy your Helm chart with the updated configuration

> 1. The Resource Manager will start a cron job every 5 minutes to compute the recommendations

Reviewer: Only this step can be documented for now

**Activate the Resource Manager's Recommendations Through the UI:**

1. Log in to the Okteto Admin UI
1. Navigate to Admin -> General where you can manage system-level settings
1. Locate the Resource Manager section. If the Resource Manager is installed but not yet enabled, you will see an "Manual/Automatic" toggle switch
1. Toggle the switch to "Automatic". This will activate the Resource Manager

  <Image
    src={require("@site/static/img/resource-manager-enabled.png").default}
    alt="share a namespace"
    width="850"
  />

Once activated, the Resource Manager will immediately begin adjusting resource requests based on average utilization.

### Disabling the Resource Manager
If you need to disable the Resource Manager temporarily, you can do so by:

- Using the toggle switch in the Admin UI to disable the Resource Managers automatic adjustments

> - To uninstall Resource Manager, you can set the `resourceManager` helm setting to `enabled: false`

Reviewer: Remove this one for now

### Customizing Resource Manager Settings
You can customize the Resource Manager by adjusting the following settings in your Helm configuration:

* You can find the full list of settings in our [Helm Reference →](self-hosted/helm-configuration.mdx#resourceManager)

## Viewing Resource Metrics and Recommendations

### Resource Metrics View

The Resource Manager introduces a new "Metrics" tab in the Okteto Dashboard's Namespace view. It's designed to give you clear insights into the resource usage and performance of your Kubernetes workloads.
This tab is available for key resources, including Deployments, StatefulSets, Jobs, CronJobs, and Pods.

* To learn more about what metrics are available, see our [Namespace Documentation →](core/namespaces.mdx#resource-metrics-view)

> ### Recommendations Banner

Reviewer: This is not available yet

The Resource Manager automates this process, dynamically adjusting resource requests based on real-time usage data of the Okteto Cluster.
This ensures your pods are running efficiently and your nodes are balanced well, improving overall performance and developer experience.

### Key Benefits
- **Improved Workflow Productivity**: Automates resource configuration, allowing developers to focus on coding rather than managing Kubernetes settings
- **Optimized Resource Usage**: Ensures resources are neither underutilized nor over-utilized, leading to cost savings
- **Enhanced Developer Adoption**: Improves the performance of development environments, leading to higher satisfaction and adoption rates amongst developers
- **Cost Efficiency**: Reduces the overhead associated with manually configuring resources, lowering operational costs

## How it Works

The Resource Manager monitors the actual CPU and memory usage of your pods over time.
It calculates the average usage and automatically adjusts the resource requests for new pods based on these averages. The system uses the following process:

> 1. Data Collection: The Resource Manager queries the Kubernetes Metric Server to collect CPU and memory usage data for all pods managed by Okteto

Reviewer: I would highlight than having the Metrics Server running in the cluster is a hard requirement for the RM

1. Average Calculation: It calculates the average CPU and memory usage for each container family (grouped by development environment, component, and container name)
1. Recommendation Generation: The Resource Manager generates new resource requests based on the average usage, applying a correction factor to ensure efficiency

> 1. Automatic Application: When a new pod is created, the recommended resource requests are automatically applied unless overridden by specific annotations

Author: Worth calling out the annotations?

Reviewer: The annotation is `dev.okteto.com/resource-manager: false`

## Enabling and Configuring the Resource Manager
### Enabling the Resource Manager
The Resource Manager is controlled through the Helm chart configuration. By default, it is enabled with the following settings:

``` yaml
resourceManager:
  enabled: true
  schedule: 300
  deletePeriod: 15
  priorityClassName:
    labels:
	annotations:
	resources:
	recommendations:
		weight:
		correction:
		min:
			cpu:
			memory:
```
To enable the Resource Manager:

> 1. Update your Helm values file to include the `resourceManager` block from above

Reviewer: This is not needed, it's done by default

1. Deploy your Helm chart with the updated configuration

> 1. The Resource Manager will start running as a cron job every 300 seconds (5 minutes)

Author: Is toggling on the mutating webhook only available through the UI?

### Enabling via the Okteto Admin UI
If the Resource Manager is not already enabled via Helm, or if you prefer to manage it from the UI, follow these steps:

1. Log in to the Okteto Admin UI
1. Navigate to Admin -> General where you can manage system-level settings
1. Locate the Resource Manager section. If the Resource Manager is installed but not yet enabled, you will see an "Enable/Disable" toggle switch

> 1. Toggle the switch to "Enable". This will activate the Resource Manager without needing to manually update the Helm chart

Reviewer: It's independent. First, the helm configuration to install the RM (default behavior). Then, from the UI you activate it to apply the recommendations

[Add Screenshot here]

> Once enabled, the Resource Manager will immediately begin monitoring and adjusting resource requests based on your specified schedule.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once activated, the Resource Manager will immediately begin adjusting resource requests based on average utilization.
```

### Disabling the Resource Manager
If you need to disable the Resource Manager temporarily, you can do so either by:

- Using the toggle switch in the Admin UI to dynamically disable the feature without redeploying the chart
- Removing or setting `enabled: false` in the Helm values file and redeploying your Helm chart

### Customizing Resource Manager Settings
You can customize the Resource Manager by adjusting the following settings in your Helm values file:

- `schedule`: Frequency (in seconds) at which the Resource Manager runs
- `deletePeriod`: Number of days to retain resource data before deletion
- `priorityClassName`: Assigns a priority class to the Resource Manager’s pods

> - `resources`: Defines resource requests and limits for the Resource Manager itself

Author: Are there more settings that we should add here?

Reviewer 2: for reference, I've created a dedicated PR for the helm config: https://github.com/okteto/docs/pull/834 (still WIP)

[Screenshot]

- **Resource Manager Recommendations**: If the Resource Manager identifies opportunities for optimizing resource requests, it will display a recommendation.
These recommendations might include increasing or decreasing CPU and memory requests based on the actual usage patterns

[Screenshot]

### Recommendations Banner
If the Resource Manager detects potential improvements, a banner will appear in the Okteto Dashboard. This banner will:

- Highlight performance issues or inefficiencies
- Provide links to the Metrics tab where you can view detailed recommendations
- Encourage enabling the Resource Manager if it is currently disabled

The banner encourages you to review these recommendations and, if the Resource Manager is not enabled, to activate it for automated management.
You can interact with the banner to view a detailed list of resources with recommendations.

[Screenshot]

## Rolling Back Changes
If you find that the Resource Manager's recommendations are not suitable for your workload, you can override its behavior:

> Add the annotation `dev.okteto.com/resource-manager: false` to your pod's metadata to prevent automatic adjustments.

Reviewer: I would put this info in another place. Maybe in this section:
https://github.com/okteto/docs/pull/826/files#diff-fb4aca11868f791cc679c3231c9a7ef5ee5f81ead783ba4d60a6d51141e14e4dR61
We could even have a FAQ explaining how to disable the RM for a particular service

Author: I think a dedicated section would be helpful for this - I imagine questions on how to do this will come up initially. Could you help me with the content for that @pchico83 ?

Reviewer: do you mean to explain how to add the annotation?
